Chester Alan Arthur was born on in Fairfield, Vermont October 5, 1829 to Rev. William Arthur and Melvina Stone. He attended public schools in Union Village, present day Greenwich, NY, and was tutored by his father. When the family moved to Schenectady, in 1844, he joined Union College at the age of 15. To help pay his $28 a year tuition he taught school in Schaghticoke. Though it has been noted that he was not a diligent student, he graduated near the top of his class in 1848 at the age of 18.  From there he took a teaching job in North Pownal, VT. Three years later he was principal of the academy, but the pay was too little ensuring Arthur  s continued part time education in law at Ballston Spa, New York.
Due to his family  s strong abolitionist views, which required them to move frequently due to unpopularity, in 1853 Chester found himself in New York City working for U.S. Congressman Erastus D. Culver. Congressman Culver, a friend of the family, brought Arthur on to the law practice where he passed the bar exam in 1854, and becoming a partner at the firm. He was quickly embroiled in two civil rights cases: in one he helped establish the precedent that any slave that arrived in New York was free, regardless of whether in transit or living in the state. In the second he started the desegregation of mass transit in Brooklyn, eventually leading to desegregation in Manhattan mass transit as well. 
Also in 1854, Arthur became a member of the Whig Party one year before the Party split on the slavery issue. The anti-slavery part of the Whigs would become known as the Republican Party a party he remained with until his death. So vitriolic was his stance against slavery he traveled to Kansas to supported anti-slavery forces there only to return a few months later disgusted by the gratuitous amount of violence and lack of regard for law. Upon returning home Arthur joined the state militia in 1857 and was eventually promoted to brigadier general and engineer-in-chief. 
He married his wife Ellen   Nell   Lewis Herndon of Fredericksburg, VA in 1859 with whom he had 3 children, two sons and a daughter. Her father was Commander William Lewis Herndon, and namesake to Herndon, VA. When the Civil war started in 1861, Arthur found himself as quartermaster of the New York State militia, while also dealing with the fact that every member of his wife  s family was fighting on the Confederate side. He was relieved of his quartermaster post in 1863 having never accepted a bribe or gift and having ensured that every receipt and purchase was recorded for accountability. 
Following the war, the Arthur family successfully reunited, and Chester moved his family in 1867 to New York City. He was appointed Collector in 1871 by President Grant a position that he succeeded in due to his commitment to law and order. He was fired by President Rutherford B. Hayes in 1878 after the President went to down minimizing work forces and cleaning out the corrupt systems of government appointments. Arthur and his branch of the Republican Party felt shafted by Hayes  s actions and quickly began to organize, they successfully moved most of Hayes  s support from state positions. However, in January 1880, he suffered a personal loss when his wife died at the age of 42. He was devastated and never remarried.
Later in 1880 at the Republican National Convention conflicts arose between the many factions of the party that saw 35 ballots done for the Presidential ticket before a compromise would be reached. James A. Garfield, a Half-Breed, was listed as President with Chester A. Arthur, a Stalwarts, as Vice President. In accepting his nomination Chester called for the   protection of Colored Citizens.   He had many goals but all that changed after the election. The fact that he moved so many times in his youth would come back to haunt him during the campaign as his opponents accused him of not being a natural-born citizen of the United States.
President Garfield was shot on July 2, 1881 but remained barely hanging on until September 19th when he finally died. The months in between were difficult as the Constitution made no statements on who had power while the President was totally incapacitated but alive. The additional issue of the assassin being a Stalwart supporter of Chester Arthur further complicated matters. 
While serving as President, his sister, Mary Arthur McElroy of Albany, served as the roll of first lady, while also assisting in raising his 12-year-old daughter, Nell. Though President Arthur was loved by the people but due to the firing of Garfield cabinet and issues arising from appointments in his cabinet, he was not as supported during the next Republican Convention.
However, during his administration he was able to help with a variety of policy issues and civil reforms such as aiding Native Americans population through increased education. In 1883 he signed the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act, which prohibited solicitation of federal employees for campaign contributions, something that had been a mandate for federal employees to retain their jobs. As a result his this policy change, the Civil Service Commission was developed civil service qualifications for federal jobs. His passion for modernizing and expanding the U.S. Navy and the appropriation of fund for new steel cruisers, gained him the nickname   Father of the American Navy.  
Chester died On November, 18, 1886 of a stroke caused by the effects of Bright  s Disease, a chronic inflammation of the kidneys. Initially diagnosed in 1881 it was kept secret until after he was out of office, in 1885. He is buried in his family plot alongside his wife, son, daughter, parents and three sisters. The   Angel of Sorrow   stand over Arthur  s sarcophagus holding a palm leaf over it. The entire monument cost $10,000 to construct. A part of that cost was paid by pennies donated by school children while the rest came from   Friends of President Arthur  , who also commissioned the construction of a statue of him in Madison Square Park in New York City.  

In 2005, The Presidential $1 Coin Act was established which intended to   revitalize the design of United States coins.   They started going into circulation in 2007 in the order that they served as president. However, do to minting errors, costs associated with minting, and the threat of potential unlawful reproduction, the programs was suspended in 2011. However, limited quantities would be produced for collectors only starting with President Arthur in 2012 and would continue until 2016 with President Reagan. 
