William Barnes, Jr (1866     1930) [Section 109, Lot 3] 
Chairman of New York State Republican Committee, Member of Republican National Committee, U.S. Surveyor of Customs for Port of Albany, newspaper owner.
William Barnes, Jr. was born on November 17, 1866. He was the son of Williams Barnes, an attorney who helped organize the first state Republican convention in 1854, and Emily Peck Weed, the daughter of Thurlow Weed. Thurlow Weed was a newspaper owner, founder of the Republican Party, a previous Chairman of the New York State Whig Party.
Williams Barnes attended a private school for education and later Albany Academy, graduating in 1884; and Harvard University, graduating in 1888. He would not make it to commencement as he would marry Grace Davis of Cincinnati, Ohio. They would reside in Albany and would have two children, Thurlow Weed Barnes, and Landon Barnes. Also in 1888, he took a position at the Albany Evening Journal as a reporter, which was started by his grandfather. That same year he would leave that job and purchase The Albany Express, the    only morning newspaper in Albany of republican persuasion.    A few years later he would eventually buy the Albany Evening Journal, The Cohoes American, and a smaller paper in Mechanicville where he would serve as the publisher. 
In 1891, following in his family   s footsteps, he became the chairman of the City of Albany, as well as the county. The Republican-dominated state would go to his company to publish government reports and reports of government agencies. In 1894, the New York Times claimed that Barnes is using his power to secure a monopoly in State printing.
In 1899 he would be appointed the U.S. Surveyor of Custom for the Port of Albany and would hold this title until 1911.   
Barnes would align himself with the    political boss    of the New York State Republican party, Thomas Collier Platt. As a result, he was able to help elect Republicans into office and become known with his influence statewide and nationally. From 1892     1911 he would serve as a Member of the New York Republican State Committee, and from 1911     1914 would serve as Chairman. 
In these roles, he would successfully get Republican elected. In 1894, he helped get Oren E. Owen into office as Mayor of Albany, securing it as a Republican Machine. On the national level, he would work to get presidents William McKinley, Theodore Roosevelt, and William Howard Taft into the White House.  
He served as the delegate to the Republican National Convention in 1904, 1908, and 1912. It was during the presidential election where he led the party   s conservative wing to help nominate Taft for reelection. Roosevelt was also advocating for the nomination, seeking a third term citing more liberal and progressive views. He would later enter the race on the newly created Progressive party, dividing republican votes and which elected a Democrat, Woodrow Wilson. 
After the election, Theodore Roosevelt would speak out against William Barnes accusing him of being a corrupt party boss and blocking progressive reforms in the state working with Democratic Tammany Hall. Barnes sued Roosevelt for defamation of character, which would end in the New York State Supreme Court. Roosevelt would be acquitted on April 30, 1915. Being referred to as    Boss Barnes,    he would separate himself from Albany. 
In addition to being a target for many legislative investigations and charges in corruption due to a Democratic insurgency starting 1910, he would begin to distance himself from Albany. He would openly against Prohibition, woman suffrage, direct primary, and organized labor. He would eventually move to New York City but would keep his voting residence in Albany. In his absence, William Hackett would be elected mayor of Albany, in 1921. This event would trigger the transition of the Albany Democratic machine. 
In October of 1922, William and his wife would divorce. Though they had not been living together for almost 15 years, she charged him with misconduct with another woman. William did not contest this. The following year, he would marry Maude Fiero Battershall. Maude was the Daughter of J. Newton Fiero, the dean of Albany Law School. 
In 1925 William Barnes would Williams Barnes would retire officially, selling his newspaper business Stephen C. Clark, heir to the Singer Sewing Machine, and founder of Baseball Hall of Fame. His wife, Maude, would pass away in 1929; he would die of pneumonia the following year on June 25, 1930, in Armonk, NY.
