
Harmanus Bleecker (1779-1849) [Section 3, Lot 61] 
U.S. Minister to the Netherlands, U.S. House of Representatives, Trustee to Albany Academy, member of University of the State of New York Board of Regents, Dutch scholar and preservationist, philanthropist.
Harmanus Bleecker was born on October 9, 1779. He was the son of Jacob Bleecker, a merchant, and Elizabeth Wendell Bleecker. He is the great-great-grandson of Jan Jansen Bleecker, one of the original settlers of Beverwyck, fur trader, and a former Mayor of Albany. He studied in law in Albany, being admitted to the New York State Bar in 1801 at the age of 22. He would set up a law firm in Albany known at Bleecker & Sedgewick, which was known statewide in the early 19th century. 
He would become involved in politics, being elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1811 as a Federalist for one term. Back in New York, he would continue his law practice where He would later be elected to the New York State Assembly from 1814      1815 where he would work with Governor Tompkins regarding funding of troops during the War of 1812. 
Harmanus would be involved in Albany and the state on many civic and business ventures and would serve as a Trustee for the Erie and Champlain Canals. In 1827 he would help as one of the commissioners who negotiated the boundary lines between New York and New Jersey. In 1831 he would vocalize his opposition to slavery and would be a vocal advocate in the Back-to-Africa movement to Liberia. In 1839 He would serve as an original board member for Albany City Hospital, present-day Albany Medical Center. 
In addition to his political and legal work, Bleecker    s was involved in many projects which benefited the areas. He served on the State Normal School, which would later be renamed University at Albany; member of the New York State Board of Regents; and Board of Governors that founded City Hospital, now Albany Medical Center. 
While growing up, he was taught Dutch and learned the history of New Amsterdam and the Netherlands. It was his passion     to keep alive in Albany the memory of Dutch customs     and would be responsible for the preservation of the St. Nicholas Benevolent Society. His connection to his Dutch heritage would be to his benefit as in 1837 he was appointed U.S. Minister to the Netherlands until 1942 for President Martin Van Buren, with whom he was close friends. While in the Netherlands he would meet his future wife Cornelia Metz and would marry in 1841. 

It has been mentioned that Harmanus     was justly considered one of Albany    s most eminent citizens.     Upon his wife    s death in 1885, the remainder of his estate was bequeathed to the City of Albany. The funds would go to the construction of a building for the Yong Men    s Association, which would also house a theatre and library. Known as the Harmanus Bleecker Hall, it was built in 1889 and would later be known as Proctor    s Harmanus theatre when the building sold in 1919. The funds would go to construct the city    s first public library at Washington and Dove Street and known as the Harmanus Bleecker Library. The building still stands today as an office building and on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places.
