Anneke Jans Bogardus (1605-1663) [Section 61, Lot 1]
Early New Netherland settler, Aunt to the wife of Jacob Leisler. Estate whose land in lower Manhattan was disputed for 250 years

There has been some dispute on the lineage of Anneke Jans. Despite claims that she is the granddaughter of William of Orange, this is untrue. However, Anneke would lead a very interesting life as an early settler of the New Netherland colony She and her sister, Marrijite, would connect themselves through marriage and align themselves to be a in the frontier of the new world.  
Anneke was born in 1605 in Flekker, Norway. She was the eldest daughter of Johannes and Tryntie Jans. Her sister Marritje would be born a couple of years later.
In April 1623, at the age of 18, she married Roeliff Jansen in Amsterdam, Netherlands. They would emigrate to New Netherlands, arriving in May of 1630. They would stay in New Amsterdam briefly before going to work in the de Laets Burg farm Rensselaerwyck, directly across from Ft. Orange in present day Rensselaer. 
The Roeliff Jansen Kill is name is his honor after getting stranded in the ice along the Hudson River and     discovering     it one evening where the Chicomingo tribe was camped out. 
After a failed attempt at farming and some dealings with trading horses, the family would associate themselves with the Dutch West India Company in 1634, moving back to New Amsterdam. Her sister Marritje immigrated to America, marrying Thymen Jansz in 1632. They would have a daughter Elsie, who would later become the wife of Jacob Leisler, a businessman who gained his weather from beaver and tobacco business. He would later lead in Leisler    s Rebellion which took control of the New York Colony from 1689      1691, serving as the Governor. 
In 1636, the company would grant them 62 acres of land on the island of Manhattan. Anneke    s parents would move in 1637, living in a house on the farm, where her mother would serve as a midwife. Roeliff would pass away the same year at the age of 36.  They would have five daughters and one son; one of their daughters born in New Netherlands would die as an infant. 
The following year Anneke would marry the Domine Everadus Bogardus, second minister to the Dutch Reformed Church in lower Manhattan. She would have four boys with him. In addition to serving the Church, Borgardus also would also be on the advisory council to Willem Kieft, Director-General of New Amsterdam. However, Bogardus and many others would be very unhappy with his governing and wrote the Dutch West India Company. Kieft    s aggression towards the Lenape tribes would lead to what is known as Kieft    s War.
In 1647, upon the arrival of New Director-General Peter Stuyvesant, Bogardus and many of the others who contradicted Kieft    s actions were sent back to the Netherlands to report to the company director. They, along with Kieft would die on the     de Princess Amalia     when it became shipwrecked off the coast of Wales. 
While Anneke    s daughter Sara would serve as a translator under Peter Stuyvesant when negotiating with the native tribes, Anneke herself would move upstate to Beverwyck. Being land-rich but have little money, she would be granted a patent near James and State Street in 1652. Her son-in-law, Pieter Hartgers would pay for the rent, the sum of of four beavers, and build her house. 
While in Beverwyck, Ammeke would garner the nickname     the vulture     and was taken to court for apparently mooning     pipe-smoking burghers.     Anneke was able to dispute the claim where she argued she was     trying to keep the hem of her skirt out of the muddy lane.    
In 1663 she would write a will     laying in her bed in a state of sickness     which bequeathed of all the land that she owned. Pperishing the same year, this declared the land in Manhattan to be divided equally among her eight living children, as well as additional sums for her first four children with Roeliff. As a wedding present to each of her children she would give them a bed and a milking cow. She would leave a silver mug to her five grandchildren. 
This 62-acre parcel would come into the controversy over the next 250 years. In 1671 it was sold by the family. However, another case specifies that the English took the property when they found out the land was Dutch. This would lead to a legal battle with the Trinity Church Corporation which would end in 1911.  
Anneke would have her funeral in the Albany    s Old Church, which was built by her son Jan, and would be buried in the Albany Rural Cemetery in the 1840s. 
