Henry Burden (1791-1871) [Section 61, Lot 4] 
Owner of Burden Iron Works,

Did Palmer do his mausoleum?

Henry Burden was born on April 20, 1791, in Dunblane, Scotland. He was the son of Peter Burden, a sheepherder, and Elizabeth Abercrombie Burden. He would attend the University of Edinburg where he would study study engineering, mathematics, and drawing. This would become beneficial as he would modernize his family’s farm by implementing a water wheel. He would immigrate to New York in 1819 in part due to Stephen Van Rensselaer who sent a letter of introduction to the American Minister in London. 
Around this time he would marry Helen McQuat in Montreal. They knew each other from Scotland and would immigrate with her family to Lachute, Quebec. They would be together for 39 years and have eight children together.
Henry would start his career in Albany at the Townsend & Corning Foundry in the manufacture of cast iron plows and other agricultural products. In 1822 he left this company and became the superintendent of the Troy Iron and Nail Factory, located at the north side of the Wynantskill Creek near the Troy-Menands Bridge. The location of the site is very beneficial for productivity due to the water power of the Hudson River.
Throughout his lifetime he would continue to gain patents. In 1825, he patented a machine for making horseshoes, which before this time were done by hand. He would continue to work on his patent over the next three decades, where he was able to increase the productivity of his machine that allowed for a horseshoe to be made one per second. During the Civil War, he would be the main source of horseshoes for the Union Army.
Burden would be embroiled in a 28-year with Erastus Corning and John Flack Winslow regarding the patent of railroad ties. In what would be one of the longest patent battle ever, the U.S. Supreme court would decide that Burden did not patent the process, but a machine in which they were made. 
He would continue to make the Troy Iron and Nail Factory profitable, and by 1835 he would own half of it. By 1848 he would become owner, and rename it Burden Iron Works. The corporate name would be H. Burden & Sons. This metal foundry would help set the course for the future creation of the Albany Iron Foundry, Bessemer Steel Works and Rensselaer Iron Works. These would all later join to become the Troy Steel and Iron Company.  
Burden would help alter the eastern side of the Hudson River. In addition to creating reservoirs along the Wynantskill Creek, to help increase water supply to the factories, he would dredge the Hudson River to allow for larger vessels to come up to Troy. Prior to this time the City of Hudson was the northern most deep-water port. Additionally railroad tracks would connect the factory with materials, such as limestone coming up from Hudson, and for iron ore from Port Henry in the Lake Champlain region.
With the creation of the Troy Boston Railroad in 1852, Burden Iron Works was able to source iron ore closer to home in Vermont. The company would venture into Vermont, specifically Bennington County, to procure mines. They would either buy, lease or come to agreements with a number of small operations. One of the earliest was in the Town of Shaftsbury, located on the New York / Vermont border. 
Some say that Burden’s water-wheel was once referred to as “the Niagara of Water Wheels” by poet Louis Gaylor Clark. It has been said that it was used as a blueprint for a Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute graduate, George Ferris. Ferris would go on to build the Ferris Wheel which was the premiere exhibit in the 1893 World’s Columbia Exposition in Chicago. 

Being at the helm of what some as have referred to as the “Silicon Valley of the 19th-century,” Burden would have the first truly all woman labor union, the largest textile mill building in 19th-century, and would help coin the term “Collar City” due to his detachable collars and cuff in his factory. Additionally, his factory would construct the hull for the USS Monitor, the first ironclad warship commissioned by the Navy during the Civil War. The remains of his company can be viewed at the Hudson Mohawk Industrial Gateway in downtown Troy. Burden is said to have employed an eighth of the population of the City of Troy. 
Henry would pass away in 1871 and would be interred in Albany Rural Cemetery. The Burden Mausoleum is extravagant in design and includes carvings of family dogs as well as his wife, Helen, who is said to have designed the structure. In total, there are 22 members of the family inside. 
