Elizabeth “Lizzie” M. Calhoun (1858-1877) [Sec 65 Lot 39]
Killed in a carriage accident in the Albany Rural Cemetery 1877

Elizabeth “Lizzie” M. Calhoun was daughter of Margaret Hunter, and step-daughter of Andrew Hunter, formerly a cattle dealer, and a wealthy Real Estate owner in West Albany which is present day Town of Colonie.  The family residence was on Delaware Avenue, where Lizzie attended Albany High School expecting to graduate in June as class valedictorian. An Albany newspaper of the time called her "one of the most loved and most promising pupils of the high school ... richly endowed physically and mentally."
On the afternoon of May 31, 1877, she went on a carriage ride in the Albany Rural Cemetery with her friend, Ms. Alice Overton. The driver of the carriage was 21-year-old James Clark, an employee of Lizzie’s stepfather. The carriage was pulled by a young pair of Black horses, recently purchased and reported to be “somewhat spirited”. It was about 4:00 pm in the North Ridge section of the Albany Rural Cemetery when the carriage started down a steep slope of road in the area near the Battersby monument. The monument pictured at Right, features an angel leading a young soul towards Heaven.  In the descent, the cross reins slipped becoming entangled under the reach pole of the carriage, and making the horses increasingly difficult to control. Soon the horses bolted, running downhill placing the carriage and its’ team in and out-of-control situation. The driver jumped, attempting unsuccessfully to untangle the reins, and was dragged along the path. 
Continuing down the incline, Lizzie Calhoun jumped from the carriage, presumably in hopes of avoiding injury. Unfortunately, she fell onto the gravel road sustaining a serious head injury. Her friend Alice remained in the carriage, colliding with trees, ultimately damaging it roof while traversing over a bridge. from the horse team, until it in the area behind the cemetery’s Chapel.  Alice’s most serious injury was a sprained ankle. The carriage at some time sustained further damage. The team was later discovered with portions of the carriage wheels and axle still connected, on lands situated behind nearby the Chapel, and owned by James Gazeley. Calhoun’s body was attended to by James Clark with the assistance of several by-standers.  Showing no signs of life, she is presumed to have died soon after. 
Lizzie M. Calhoun died on May 31, 1877.
Her headstone, created by James Gazeley who was also a stone cutter, features formal columns and a bouquet of flowers. 
