Charles Calverley (1833-1914) [Section 107, Lot 109]
Sculptor and Stone Carver


Charles Calverley was born on November 1, 1833. He was one of four children to Charles Calverley, a carpenter and machinist, and Elizabeth Chalton Calverley. The death of his father in 1846 would result in him dropping out of school at age 13 to support his family. 
Calverley would apprentice for John Dixon, a local stone cutter who is responsible for some of the carvings for the New York State Capitol, and Albany City Hall. For the first year he would clean out the stove and make a fire, earning him $1 a week which would go to support his family. Over the next seven years he would study under Dixon.
In 1853 his work would come to the attention of another local artist, the neoclassical sculptor Erastus Dow Palmer. Palmer would buy Calverley    s contract from Dixon and Charles would work for him for the next 15 years. Alongside other apprentices such as Jonathan Scott Hartley, and T.H. Matteson, together they would carve marble stone following models Palmer had first assembled using plaster and clay. For a brief period of time Charles     brother John would work for Palmer. However, his brother would unfortunately die as a Union Soldier during the Civil War. 
In 1868 he would move to New York City with his wife, Susan, whom he married two years prior. He would open a studio in the Madison Square Park neighborhood on 25th Street where he would submit a bust of President Lincoln to the National Academy of Design. He would become an associate member of the group in 1874.  
He would be well-known for carving medallions, such as President Lincoln, or bas-reliefs, like     Little Ida     which is still on display at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. He would stumble upon this his source of inspiration my accident in 1881.     Little Ida     would be a young girl who was taking care of a boy whom he was doing a portrait of. Charles would notice the     string of alabaster beads around her long neck and large red ear-drops.     This would become one of his most well-known medallions. He would revise the portrait in 1899 to include the inscription     The Race John Brown Died For.      
Through his life he would do over 250 busts, medallions, tablets, and statues. He would do notables such as President Washington, and President Garfield. The bust of Lafayette Foster, a U.S. Senator from Connecticut, who would later serve on the Supreme Court is on permanent display in the U.S. Capitol. He would also go on to do literature masters of the 19th-century like Sir Walter Scott, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, and James Russell Lowell. His most famous would be that of Scottish poet, Robert Burns, which he did in 1888 for (see image below Left) Washington Park in Albany. It garnered the attention of Andrew Carnegie who had a life size bust commissioned for himself and for the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

Calverley died on February 25, 1914 of pneumonia in Essex Fells, NJ 1914.  He would be interred at Albany Rural Cemetery and would have a self-portrait bronze bust on the main monument. His wife would have a bas-relief as on the same monument. A medallion of his mother, and brother, John would nearby in the family plot. 
