Edward Cornelius Delavan (1793-1871) [ Section 53 Lot 10]
A major leader in the Temperance Movement, Hotelier

Edward Cornelius Delavan was one of four children to Stephen Delavan and Hannah Wallace. Born in 1793, there is some discrepancy if he was born in Schenectady, or Franklin, located in Delaware County. Upon the death of his father in 1802 his brother, sisters, and mother would move to Albany. Delavan would work as an apprentice in a print shop Whiting, Backus, and Whiting. He would attend the Reverend Samuel School in Lansingburgh.
He would eventually work as a clerk in his brother’s hardware store and would become a partner. In 1815, at age 21 he would move to Birmingham, England to supply agent. Five years later he would return and live in New York City where he would work as a wholesale wine merchant. 
At the same time, he would wed Abigail Marvin Smith, of Lyme Connecticut. They would have five children together. Their son, John Savage Delavan, would attend the Charlier Institute in New York City and later Union College and would practice medicine as a Dr. of Homeopathy. 
Looking at the financial prospects of the Erie Canal, he would purchase parcels of land around it, which would become financially rewarding. He would help establish the Canal Bank of Albany in 1829 and would retire to Saratoga County in 1833. 
In 1829 he would be approached by Reverend Nathaniel Hewitt in regards to the growing anti-alcohol movement that was started to take route in the United States. This would lead to Delevan being a founder of the New York State Temperance Society. Before this time temperance was solely looking at hard liquors, and Delevan would be the first to argue that “wealthy must give up wine… before ordinary American would quit drinking cheap hard liquor.” It has been said he that he poured the collection of his wine cellar in the street. 
Delevan would argue against the use of communion wine during religious serves and would later leave the Presbyterian Church, becoming an Episcopalian. He would eventually recruit Dr. Eliphalet Nott, President of Union College. Nott most likely was pesuaded by Delevan as he was a major donor and woulrd serve as a trustee for Union College.
With his wealth, Delevan would promote temperance globally.  While visiting France and Italy he promoted his disapproval of alcohol use their countries. Additionally, as owner of one of the first steam-powered printing presses he was able to commission and distribute graphic lithographs of “alcohol-diseased stomachs” to almshouses, prisons, schools, and hospitals. In 1846 was the first person to do a mass mailing to every household to New York State. 
In 1845, he would build the Delevan House, one of the first temperance hotels. This six-story structure was located on what is today known as Tercentennial Park on Broadway in Albany. Though marketed as a dry establishment, management was able to introduce liquor through a loophole. However, it was never publically disclosed. 
In 1846 He was able to lobby the legislature to adopt a local prohibition, which 80% of the towns voted in favor for. However, the following year many towns reversed this law. In 1855 New York would adopt a statewide prohibition, though the courts would overturn the ruling the same year. He would shift his stance to “voluntary abstinence.”
In 1848 his wife Abigail would pass away and would be buried in the family plot at Albany Rural Cemetery. In 1850 he would re-marry to Harriet Anne Schuyler, daughter of Cornelius Cuyler Schuyler, and Harriet Lane Hillhouse; great-great-great granddaughter of Pieter Philip Schuyler. They would have three children, Harriet Schuyler, Ellen Harden, and Henry Warren Delevan. They would reside in Ballston, NY.
Delevan would continue to lobby for the temperance movement, sending pamphlets to Union soldiers during the Civil War. 
He would pass away on January 15, 1871, in Schenectady, leaving nothing to the temperance movement. To honor his legacy in the movement, Illinois and Wiscon have named cities in his honor. The Delevan House would burn down on December 30, 1894, killing 19. Albany author William Kennedy would fictionalize the incident in his novel The Flaming Corsage.
