John Alden Dix (1860-1928) [Section 41, Lot 11]
38th Governor of New York State, State Democratic Chairman, established NYS Conservation Commission, Chairman of the Washington County Democratic Committee


John Alden Dix was born on December 25, 1860, in Glens Falls, NY. He was the son of James Lawton Dix, and his wife, Laura Stevens. James Dix was a businessman in Glens Falls; he was a partner in Hopkins, Dix & Company, which managed a foundry and machine shop, as well as the operation of a quarry which dealt with black marble. Additionally, he also owned a business that did general repairs for the mills located along the Hudson River. Due to the prominence of the family, Dix Avenue would be named in their honor.
As a youth, John would attend the district school on Ridge Street and later Glen Fall Academy. In 1879 would enroll into Cornell University, graduating in 1883.
He would work for his family’s business for a time, but in 1887 in would go to work for the Iroquois Pulp & Paper factory, a lumber and pulp company. Located in Thomson, NY, this hamlet is along the Hudson River just north of the confluence of the Battenkill River in the Town of Greenwich. Named in honor of the company owner, Lemon Thomson, Dix would go on to marry his daughter Gertrude and was made a partner. When Thomson passed away in 1897, Dix would buy out the shared and rename it, Thomson & Dix. 
He would become successful within the business, establishing companies in Washington County; Blandy Paper Company, Standard Wall Paper Company, and the American Wood Board Company. The business would expand to northern Herkimer County as with the establishment of the  Moose River Lumber Company and McKeever River Lumber Company thanks in part to Dix’s friend William Seward Webb who established the Adirondack and St. Lawrence Railroad. 
Dix would establish a one-for-one rule, with a replanting program for every tree that was cut down. Planning aheard for the potential demise of his lumber company’s resources, John would be viewed as an early ecologist.
He would become active within society serving on many boards: vice president, First National Bank of Albany; director of Albany Trust Company; director Glens Falls Trust Company; director, National Bank of Schuylerville, and treasurer of American Wood Board Company. 
As an Episcopalian, he would serve as the Warden for St. Stephen’s Church, and would also serve as a member of the standing committee for the Albany Diocese. In 1908 he would serve as a delegate to the Pan-Anglican Congress in London. This event which had 17,000 in attendance marked a transition for the church’s mission, most notably interlinking churches who use in Anglican Communication, as well as recognizing cultural diversity and organizational autonomy. 
He would become politically active serving as the Chairman of the Washington County Democratic Committee and would serve as a delegate to the 1904 Democratic National Convention. In 1906 he name would be put forward for governor at the 1906 New York State Democratic Convention but declined. In 1906 he ran for Lieutenant Governor but was defeated. In 1910, which served as the Chairman of the New York State Democratic Committee, he would run of the governorship and win. 
Governor Dix would serve from Jan 1, 1911 – December 1913. He would often be referred to as a relative of former New York Governor John Adams Dix; however, they were of no relation. During his time as governor, he would establish the State Conservation Commission, a precursor to the NYS Department of Environmental Conservation. He would also approve legislation that would improve state highways, and authorize direct primary elections. 
During his time in office, two major fires occurred in the state. On March 25, 1911, the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory killed 87 workers. Only one of the four elevators was functional, and exit doors either open inward or was locked from the outside to prevent employee theft. Four days later on March 29, 1911, the New York State Capitol would catch on fire, which nearly destroyed the State Library. This would prompt the establishment of the State Fire Marshal’s office and stricter fire and safety regulation as well as building codes.
He would also help pass the “one-day-of-rest-in-seven” law which reduced the work week to 54 hours and improved conditions for women and children working in factories. Additionally, he established the New York State Factory Commission to investigate factory conditions, and authorized 32 safety worker laws. 
Though he did not receive the nomination of in 1912, he would leave the office in a surplus of $4,000,000, over $100,000,000 in today. However, his family finances did not do so well. That same year he would receive an honorary degree from Hamilton College. 
He would retire from political life and move to Santa Barbara with his wife the following year.  She would pass away on December 18, 1923, and he would pass away on April 9, 1928, in New York City battling Coronary Thrombosis. He and Gertrude would be interred in Lemon Thompson family plot at Albany Rural Cemetery.
