Blandina Bleecker Dudley (1783-1863) [Section 61 Lot 1]
Patron of Dudley Observatory, Philanthropist, Politician’s Wife

Blandina Bleecker was born on September 1, 1783. One of seven children, she was the daughter of Rutger Jansen Bleecker and Catharine Elmendorph. She is a descendant of the Schuylers and is the great-granddaughter of Jan Jansen Bleecker, who was one of the patentees of the Saratoga Patent. This 150,000 acre Saratoga Patent would later become part of Saratoga and Washington Counties. Her father would work as a merchant and also get into land surveying where he purchased 22,000 acres in Oneida and Herkimer Counties,  (present-day Utica) for 15 cents an acre. He would also sell land which was left by loyalists. This land prospecting would make the family extremely wealthy. 
Blandina would have some formal education, attending the Moravian Seminary for Young Ladies; the first school for girls in America, located in Bethlehem, PA. Her father would pass away in October of 1787, and her mother in 1808.  
On July 7, 1809, at the age of 26 she would marry Charles Edward Dudley, an Englishman who moved to Newport, RI during the American Revolution. He would eventually move to Albany, where he would work as a clerk in a merchant’s counting room. Dudley would become politically active where he would serve in the State Senate from 1820 – 1825. In the Senate, he would be very supportive of expanding education including astronomical science. During this time he would also serve as the Mayor of Albany from 1821 – 1824 and then again in 1828 – 1829.
In 1829 he would be selected to serve in the U.S. Senate, filling the vacancy of Martin Van Buren, who was elected Governor of New York. Serving in this post until 1833,  he would pass away on January 23, 1841. The two would not have any children. 
After his death, Blandina would become known for her philanthropic ventures in the area. In 1851 she would consult with a banker and financial advisor Thomas W. Olcott, Esq. in regards to her fortune. In 1851 he would approach her about an observatory for Albany, as her late husband enjoyed astronomy, visiting the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, England during their honeymoon. She 
would donate $12,000 and giving her the naming rights. She would establish an endowment and would eventually donate a total of $105,000; a sum amounting to over $3million today. 
The Dudley Observatory would sit in Arbor Hill on land donated by Stephen Van Rensselaer IV, which today is known as Dudley Heights. Albany sculputor Erastus Dow Palmer would be commissioned to do a marble bust of Charles, and a bas-relief of Blandina. 
In 1860, she would sue her nephew which would end up in the New York State Supreme Court. Her nephew obtained Blandina’s signature on what she thought was for power of attorney, authorizing her nephew to conduct certain business on her behalf with Thomas Olcott. However, the document was a transfer of property which would take effect upon her death.  Her will would be disputed in 1864 by the Albany County Surrogates Court. Additionally, Olcott would later claim credit for later donations that she would give to the observatory. 
Blandina Bleecker Dudley would pass away on March 6, 1873, at the age of 79, and would be buried in Albany Rural Cemetery next to her husband in the Bleecker Family plot. She would establish the Dudley Observatory as America’s oldest non-academic institute of astronomical research. 
The Dudley Observatory would temporary shutdown in 1873 despite popular support, and regular public viewing. In 1876 it would reopen with a focus of creating star catalogs. Given its location near the railroad and the sensitive instruments inside the observatory, they would move to a new location.  
In 1893 a new observatory would be erected on South Lake Avenue on property that was part of the Albany Almshouse. In 1905 it would become the Carnegie Institution’s Department of Meridan Astronomy and would create the largest and most accurate catalog of the stars. This would result in many people to work in doing the calculations; the observatory would employ the largest women in American science during this before World World II.
After the war, the observatory would partner with NASA, and shift intellectual focus several times. They would move out of their site on South Lake Avenue site, which would become the  location of the Capital District Psychiatric Center. A new lab would be built on Fuller Road where they would focus their research on U2 spy planes and rockets. 
Continuing program evolution would initiate the observatory to examine becoming a foundation, funding programs which advance astronomy as well as astronomic education. In 2015, it would partner with the Museum of Innovation and Science now situated in Schenectady. It contains an archive and library of its work over the past 160 years.  
