James Eights  (1798-1882 [Section 53, Lot 56]
Albany’s first historical artist, draftsman to for Erie Canal, first explorer to render and write about natural history of Antarctica, scientist, naturalist,

James Eights was born 1798 to Dr. Jonathan Eights and Alida Wynkoop. He one of three children, being the only son. The family resided in the Dutch-style family home in at 92 North Pearl Street, at the corner of Columbia Street. His father would have a private practice, but would also serve as the physician to the Albany County Almshouse. 
His maternal grandfather, Jacobus Wynkoop, originally from New York City, moved to Kingston where he would operate the family’s merchant vessel, Espous, which traded with the West Indies. During the American Revolution he would lie about his age and serve in the war. He was commissioned Captain of the Fourth New York Regiment, and in 1776 commanded vessels on the inland lakes, directed by General Schuyler and the Continental Congress. However, Benedict Arnold would also receive the same charge. Wynkoop would refuse to surrender his post, which resulted in him being arrested. 
Wynkoop would later serve in Kingston, and would be liquidated of all debts do to his wartime service. The Wynkoop family would later move to Albany nearby the Eights before the end of the war. He would become a boat builder, and his sloop Experiment is said to have sailed to China, along with a famous navigator from Albany named Stewart Dean. 
His paternal grandfather Abraham Eights, would come to Albany and become a successful sailmaker. During the American Revolution he would be one of the signers of the Albany Son’s of Liberty 1766, which was a direct result of the Stamp Act Riots. He would briefly serve on the Albany Committee, before supporting the revolution. After the war he was granted land and would set up a business. He would continue to make sails, and import foreign goods. He would also serve as Dockmaster for the city of Albany; known in the city as “Father Eights.”
James Eights interest in art, and the natural science, biology and natural medicine would beneficial when he was appointed by Stephen Van Rensselaer to serve as a draftsman for geological survey of the Erie Canal. He would work under Amos Eaton and Ebenezer Emmons, who co-founded Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. 
His work on the Erie Canal would become beneficial and lead help found the Albany Lyceum of Natural History in 1823, with Stephen Van Rensselaer. He would write in their newsletter Transactions, and would continue to do so for the next 30 years. The Albany Lyceum would later become the Albany Institute of Art and History. Eights would work with Amos Eaton on the “Traveling School of Science on the Erie Canal” where he would serve as mentor and second in command. Eights would work briefly for RPI in 1827 as an examiner. 
In 1828, Eights would be appointed to serve in Edmund Fanning’s “Exploring Expedition of 1830.”  The expedition was originally slated to take place in 1812, but delayed due to the War of 1812. As this would be known as the “Voyage of Discovery” Eights was brought on to write reports to Congress and be able to recognize unusual plants and animals, as well as illustrate his findings. Eights would serve as surgeon, naturalist and artist for the trip, though he had never practiced medicine.
During the voyage to Antarctica Eights was the first to describe the volcanoes of the continent and the plant life, and sea animals. 
Eights would go on to publish papers with detailed drawings of his findings. In the Journal of the Boston Society of Natural History, Eights described a 10-legged sea spider which was the first of its kind. However, further research would discover that Eights may have drawn “one too many pairs of legs.”
In 1837 Congress would plan for a second trip to the Antarctic. However, Eights would not be added to the trip. There is speculation on whether it was “professional jealousy,” alcohol or substance abuse. He would return to Albany to live with his parents and would write anonymous articles for the Zodiak, and Albany magazine. Through the assistance of his close friend, Ebezener Emmons who was serving as the New York State Geoligist, he would be appointed Assistant State Geologist in the Central New York District. By 1838 he was a confirmed bachelor. 
In the 1840s and 50s as Albany was experiencing a boom due to the Industrial Revolution, the skyline would change, and Eights would start composing watercolors of his recollections of the city. He would compose cityscapes titled which showcased the city’s Dutch and Colonial era architecture. The color sketches would be titled “Old Albany as it appeared in 1805.” Though he would never become famous as an artist, his images have been used by historians as the earliest artistic renderings of the City of Albany. Both of his parents would pass away at the end of the 1840s. 
During this time he would also do contract work in New England and North Carolina as a geologist and mining surveyor. He would continue to publish papers for Transactions of the Albany Institute and would write historical essays published under assumed names. An account in 1852 mentioned that he shared rooms with a Mr. Lawtenslager, who owned a business on State Street. 
James would become destitute and have to move in with one of his sister, Catherine who lived in Greenfield Center. He would outlive his siblings and would pass away in Ballston Spa in 1882 at the age of 84 of Bright’s disease, a chronic inflammation of the kidneys. He is buried in the family plot. 
