James Hall, Jr. (1811-1898) [Section 18 Lot 93]
Father of modern geology, Founder of the New York State Museum. Founder of American Association of Geologists, Founder of International Congress of Geologists, First president of Rensselaer Association of Graduates (Alumni Association), First state Paleontologist. 

James Hall was born on September 12, 1811, in Hingham, MA, a coastal city south of Boston. The oldest of four children, he was the son of James Hall, Sr., a superintendent or a woolen mill, and Sousanna Dourdain Hall. James took a fascination with nature and the sea where he would collect shells. James would enroll in the newly founded school, Rensselaer School in Troy (today    s Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute) whose approaches to learning would be through what is now known as a modern scientific prospectus, with field trips and     hands-on laboratory.     Unable to afford the cost of transportation to Troy, he would walk the 200 miles for his education.
James would study under Amos Eaton, a geologist, botanist, and a co-founder of the college, and Ebenezer Emmons, a geologist who was responsible for naming the Adirondack Mountains and Mt. Marcy. He would graduate in 1832 with honors and in received his master    s degree the following year. James would stay on to teach chemistry, natural science, and geology. In 1836, he would serve as an assistant geologist, working under Emmons in the Second District of northern New York, where he would study the iron deposits in the Adirondacks. In 1837, he would later be assigned to manage the newly created Fourth District. After the study in 1841, James would become the New York State    s first Paleontologist. 
During the survey period, he would marry Sarah Aiken, daughter of a local lawyer in 1838. She was Catholic, and he would later convert to the religion as well. She would publish the book, Phantasia and other poems, which include a translation of Friedrich Schiller    s symphonic poem, Ritter Toggenburg, and her work done in the Romantic style. They would have four children together, two sons, and two daughters. 
In 1843, he would publish the final report of his survey in the western district. Known as Geology of New York, Part IV (1843) it would receive a lot of acclaims and become a classic in geological literature. 

During the 1850s James would continue his work outside of the state where he would identify the first fossil reefs in North America while surveying northern Michigan and Wisconsin. He would serve as state geologist for Wisconsin as well as Iowa. 
Around 1852, a large tract of land would be used for his laboratory on what is today, the southwest corner of Lincoln Park. His lab would be built by Calvert Vaux and Andrew Jackson Downing, one of his last projects before his death. It remains one of the few remaining structures of their partnership. The building would later be converted into a meeting space once the property became a park. Today is part of the Sunshine School and is listed on the U.S. National Register of Historic Places and a U.S. National Historic Landmark.
It was in this laboratory where James would discover the stromatolite fossils of the Petrified Sea Gardens outside of Saratoga Springs. James would take on numerous apprentices, such as Charles Doolittle Walcott who would later work at the Smithsonian, Charles Emerson Beecher, and Josiah Whitney, who would later go on to teach at Harvard and create the California Geological Survey. Within his lab would be items from many different collections. He was known to     borrow     items for scientific research and     hoped the owner might be generously moved or might forget.    
James would serve on many geology organizations: The Geological Society of America (first president), International Geologic Congress (vice-president), National Academy of Sciences (founding member), the French Academy of Sciences, and Geological Society of London where he would receive the Wollaston Medal. 
In 1866 he would be named the director of the New York State Museum of Natural History, currently the site of the New York State Department of Education. The same year his expertise would be needed during the construction of Harmony Mill No. 3 at Cohoes Falls on the Mohawk River. During construction, the remains of a mastodon had been discovered in two potholes,     which has been worn into the bedrock by the swirling action of water and stones at the end of the last Ice Age.     Known as the Cohoes Mastodon, it would be on display at the mill, later in Troy, and then a county fair before it was gifted to the state the following year. It is currently located in the lobby of the New York State Museum. 

Hall would publish numerous bodies of work during his lifetime. From 1847      1894 he would publish 13 volumes of The Paleontology of New York, over 30 books, and assisted in federal and state publications as well as over 1000 works. His wife would do many illustrations to James     work. 
James and Sarah would reside at 1 Morton Avenue in Albany, the current location of Albany City Criminal Court. Due to     domestic infidelities     he would construct a separate home for her on the other side of his garden where she would have a staff of her own. She would pass away in 1895. James would die three years later in Bethlehem, New Hampshire. 
Today one of the residence halls is named in his honor at RPI, Hall Hall. 
