Andrew Hamilton (1854-1908) [Section 28 Lot 91]
Judge, Lawyer, aided in the creation of New York Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure, associated with creator of Yellow Dog Funds.  
Andrew Hamilton was born on April 29, 1854 in Lansingburg, NY, now a part of Troy, NY. He was educated at Christian Brothers’ Academy and Albany Boys Academy. He started off his career at Western Union Telegraph Company, D.D.C. Mink Transportation Company, and principal in the Albany public night school. He would serve in this roll while studying law and would be admitted to the New York Bar at in 1875. The same year he set up a law practice with Hugh Reilly under the name Reilly & Hamilton. He would marry Jessie R. Walker in 1878 and would have four children Mary, Elizabeth, Jessie, and Andrew.  
Hamilton would become active in politics during this time and would serve in a number of political positions: Judge of the City Court of Albany, Assistant District Attorney, District Attorney of Albany County, and Clerk of the State Court of Claims. He is known for annotated and issued the first editions of the New York Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure. He was also served as counsel to New York Life Insurance Co. where he edited many works on insurance and corporation matters, one which included the New York State Insurance Law. In 1905 legislative commission within the state Assembly investigated the insurance industry. They discovered that Hamilton’s dealing with New York Life lead to what is known today as yellow dog fund, a slush fund used to lobby and bride elected officials on bills which would benefit the insurance industry. He testified before the legislative commission, which would later drop the charges against him and the scandal. 
The turn of the 20th century gave Hamilton many hardships. In 1900 his son, Andrew would die at age seven; his law partner died in 1904; and in 1907 his wife passed away. Hamilton would die a year later in 1908 of a heart attack at the age of 54. In 1912 his daughters died when a train plunged down 30-foot embankment in Westport, Ct. who were returning from a funeral of a family friend. 
The 20-foot-tall Celtic cross was built for their son. Designed by architect Marcus T. Reynolds, an Albany architect who designed many building in the region and also buried in Albany Rural Cemetery. His architecture was in a Dutch Revival style such as Hackett Middle School, and Gideon Putnam in Saratoga Springs. The Delaware & Hudson Building currently the headquarters of the State University of New York (SUNY), is considered his masterpiece. The cross was carved by John Frances Brine, who also worked on the State Capitol. 
