Elizabeth Knapp (1818      1898) [Section 18 Lot 31]
Albany    s Angel of Mercy

A small, plain marble headstone in the shadow of the spectacular Dalton cinerarium marks the grave of a woman once known as "Albany's Angel of Mercy."
She died on March 15, 1898, at the Home of the Friendless, a residence for older women with limited means (which would later become the Albany Guardian Society).  Her burial card gives her age as 79 years, and her cause of death is stated as "senile decay." 

She was born in 1818 to a family that mixed old New England and Dutch roots and raised on lower Hamilton Street.  Her father, Hubbell Knapp, was the master of a Hudson River sloop, the Syren.  

Elizabeth graduated from the Albany Female Academy in 1837 and, at some point, left the Second Dutch Church for the Episcopal Church.

In the late summer of 1853, an infant was found dead and abandoned in Kane's Walk, a small park then located between the present site of the old Philip Schuyler High School and South Pearl Street.  Not long after, Elizabeth began her appeal for support for what she called "The Juvenile Retreat."  This little refuge for poor children, located just a block from Kane's Walk at 181 South Pearl, was also known as "The Ragged School."  Elizabeth established it as both a home and school for orphans and operated it herself with a few volunteers.  It was not uncommon for infants to be abandoned on the Retreat's doorstep.

She also tried to speak out against conditions at the City's Almshouse, banging on that institution's door on a cold day to visit the poor house and confront its director about what she saw as abuses there, ranging from the "brutal" treatment of residents to foul food, insufficient clothing, and the too-close association of the sexes.  The door was quite literally closed in her face.

Her Ragged School survived on donations from the citizens of Albany.  There were concerts to raise funds for her orphans.  The State Legislature gave $1,000 to pay off the mortgage on 181 South Pearl.  But such charity was not enough to sustain the endeavors of this "truly philanthropic young lady."  Her father, who had apparently supported her work, died in 1862.  A few years later, for reasons unknown, Elizabeth moved away from Albany until the 1890s.

In her absence, the Ragged School continued for a couple of years, but after the founding of the Orphan's Home of St. Peter's Church, many of the children were transferred there.  The Juvenile Retreat eventually became a girls-only institution and moved from the South End to Chapel Street.

In failing health and likely suffering from some form of dementia, Elizabeth returned to Albany around 1896.  She became a resident of the Home of The Friendless for the final two years of her life.  It was reported that a woman who sat by her bedside during her final hours was one of the little orphans she had once cared for at her Ragged School.

She was buried on April 22, 1898, the ground having still been frozen when she died.
