Daniel Manning (1831-1887) [Section 27 Lot 5]
U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, Director of The National Commercial Bank, Journalist, Businessman, Chairman of New York State Democratic Committee Chairman of Albany County Democratic Committee, namesake to Manning Boulevard.


Daniel Manning was born on August 16, 1831. He was the second child of John Manning and Eleanor Oley Manning. At age six, his father passed away, causing him to work many jobs to assist his family’s finances. At the age of ten, while attending school, he would work in the New York State Assembly as the page, and for a newspaper, the Albany Altas, as a paperboy. A year later he would leave his formal education to take a full-time job at the paper as a “boy of all work.”

At the newspaper, he would become a printer, and later a reporter when it merged with the Albany Argus in 1856. He would serve in this role until 1863. The Argus, the Democratic-leaning newspaper, would rival the Evening Journal, the Republican publication which was operated by Thurlow Weed. The Albany Argus would refer to itself as “The Cheapest and Most Widely-Circulated Democratic Newspaper in the United States” when advertising to the public. 

During the Civil War, he would also cover stories of the NY Legislature for the Associated Press as well as the Brooklyn Eagle. At the Argus, he would serve as assistant to one of the newspaper partners, and later become a partner himself. In 1865, due to the death of William Cassidy, president of the newspaper, Manning would be elected to take his role. He would also take over his role as director of The National Commercial Bank. 

Working for a Democratic newspaper, he would befriend those within the party in Albany and would become involved himself. In 1868, he would be elected chairman of the Democratic Committee for Albany County. In 1874, he would be a member of the state convention, which elected Samuel Tilden as Governor. Starting in 1876 he would have several positions with the New York Democratic Party. In 1876, committee member; 1879-80 secretary; 1881-84 chairman; and 1877 leader of the delegation, due to the health of Governor Tilden. He would serve the chairman of the Democratic National Convention in 1880. This same time he would help elect Grover Cleveland to the governorship, and his brother John, to replace him as the Mayor of Buffalo.

Grover Cleveland would become the Democratic nominee for president in 1884 election. The current president Chester A. Arthur, a Republican and Albany native, would not receive the nomination, going instead to James Blaine. In addition to the first female candidate Belva Ann Lockwood on the Equal Rights Party, other parties like the Greenback, and Prohibition party would split the popular votes, with Cleveland getting 48.85%, and Blaine getting 48.28%. Though Cleveland would also receive more electoral votes, which made him the clear winner, as this was the first time a Democrat took office in 24 years, Manning would have to testify on Cleveland’s behalf. 

That same year, on November 19, 1884, Manning would marry his second wife, Mary Margarette Fryer, a descendant of Robert Livingston. President-elect Cleveland would attend the marriage.

Manning would be appointed the United States Secretary of the Treasury. During his tenure, he would and would reduce tariffs, opposed efforts to reduce a federal surplus, and oppose unnecessary appropriations. He would also be responsible for helping being known for bringing back the Silver standard back into the circulation since the Coinage act of 1873. Though he would not see the Bland-Allison Act passed which required the U.S. Treasury to purchase domestic silver, his face would appear on a $20 silver certificate in 1891, and 1892.

Manning would retire from both the Treasury in 1887 as he would take over as president of the Bank of New York. That same here he would retire from the Argus where his son, John, would take over as editor. In December of the same year, he would die of heart disease. He is buried across from his political and newspaper rival, Thurlow Weed.

Daniel Manning’s legacy lives on in Albany as a portion of Fredrick Law Olmsted’s plan for a parkway around Albany. Though not complete, a part of it would be and named in his honor, Manning Boulevard. 


