Dr. Alden March (1795      1869) [Section 52, Lot 1]
co-founder of Albany Medical College, 19th century surgeon, innovative professor of anatomy. 

Alden March was born in Sutton, Massachusetts on September 20, 1795. It was here that he went to school while also working on his family    s farm during the busy seasons until his father    s death in 1814. In was in 1817 when he started to teach at a writing school in Hoosick, NY during the academic year, and a quarryman during the summer.  His brother, an army surgeon, suggested he study medicine and began to study medicine as well as Latin, and Greek under his brother. In 1818 he started to attend medical lectures on the topics of anatomy and surgery in Boston and later went to graduate from Brown University in 1820 at the age of 25.
Shortly thereafter, while visiting a brother in Cambridge, NY, it was there that he performed his first surgery on a patient with hare-lip. Today it is known as cleft lip or cleft palate, a congenital disability when an infant    s lip or mouth do not perform properly. His surgeries were known to be clever, successful, and quick. It is believed that March gave the first class in New York on anatomy in New York State. In 1821, he procured bodies in Boston and had them shipped to Albany for public dissection in front of a class of fourteen. Though it is not known how many surgeries he was able to do given a lack of records, the one that are on file mention over 7120 procedures during his lifetime.
In 1834 he established a Practical School for Anatomy and Surgery, the Albany Medical School; however, a fire destroyed the buildings as well as his work and research. This disaster would lead him to help co-found Albany Medical College with Dr. James H. Armsby, brother of his wife. March would be appointed a professor of surgery and would remain until his death. Though Albany Medical College was not the first location to have surgical clinics, however, it is believed that it is the first location to introduce communication methods and streamline them to the medical community. 
Throughout his life he would garner a number of medical appointments: professor of anatomy, Vermont Academy of Medicine (1825); professor of anatomy, Albany Medical Seminar (1827); professor of anatomy and operative surgery, Albany Medical School (1833); professor of surgery, Albany Medical College (1834); president, Albany County Medical Society (1832, 1833); president,, New York State Medical Society (1857); and president of American Medical Association (1864) in addition to being one of its founders. Additionally, he was an honorary member of the Pennsylvania State Medical Society, Connecticut State Medical Society, and Rhode Island State Medical Society. 

He married Joanna P. Armsby in 1824, and the couple had four children, two boys, and two girls. He was a well known Christian and loved his family. He died visiting his daughter at her home on June 17, 1869.
Throughout his life, March went on to write about a number of topics, including improved medical equipment for hare-lip. He would later invent instruments which help for the removal of dead bone and employ better methods for removing urinary calculi. Another area of focus for him was morbus-cozarius, or hip disease. This is a disease of the hip-joint, which is common to children with scrofula, a TB like bacteria. March would further his research later in life by going abroad to help perfect his study and treatment of the disease. 
His Legacy lives on today at the college he help create:
    	The Alden March Bioethics Institute at Albany Medical College gives students a Graduate Certificate clinical ethics, a Master of Science in Bioethics, and a Doctorate in Professional Studies in health ethics and policy;
    	Alden March Award which is given to a senior of the college who has     demonstrated the greatest proficiency and aptitude for surgery    ; and 
    	Albany Medical College Department of Surgery Alden March Distinguished Surgeon Award which honors an alumnus or trainee from AMC whose research or accomplishments receive national recognition.
