Jack McAuliffe (1866-1937) [Section 15 Lot 73]
    Napoleon of the Ring,     America    s first World Champion undefeated boxer. 



Jack McAuliffe was born on March 24, 1866, in Cork, Ireland. He is the second son to his parents Cornelius McAuliffe and Jane Bailey. Cornelius would immigrate to America after his birth due to the Fenian Rising, between the Irish and British. He would settle in Bangor Maine, before enlisting into the U.S. Army. He would save money for his family to come over. In 1871, the McAuliffe family would emigrate to Bangor. 

While in school one of his teachers would occasionally beat students with his cane. Jack would be subject to this one evening after class but would retaliate and went after the professor with his fists. The two would get into a fighting match both resulting in injuries to the face. They would call a truce and become good friends moving forward. 

Jack would take up fighting for money, sometimes fighting sailors who were much larger and older that him. He was referred to as     naturally strong, agile, and a gamester     swinging one    s fists in a brisk battle and getting paid cash for such activities was like finding money.    

The family would move to Williamsburg, Brooklyn in 1882, where Cornelius would take on a better paying job as a cooper. Jack would work for Western Union as well as an apprentice for his father. He apprentice station would have recently been vacated by another soon to be a famous boxer, Jack Dempsey. They would become good friends who would train and drink together. It was during this time where McAuliffe would learn his     cat-like reflexes     where his self-developed skills and stamina was used to defeat his opponents. 

McAuliffe would begin his career in 1884 in the featherweight competitions. The location would be held behind the walls of the Evergreen Cemetery in Brooklyn, to     avoid the local police.     He would go on entering amateur tournaments in 1885 at the New York Athletic Club hosted by Tammany Hall. He would win all and become a lightweight champion. 

Bill Maden would become his manager and would start enlisting him into tournament around the country. Maden would also serve as manager to John Sullivan. 

On November 16, 1887, he would go up against the English champion Jem Carney at the Belmont Hotel. The match lasted 78 rounds and went into dawn. The manager appealed to end the fight for fear of being arrested. The match was declared a controversial draw with both competitors declaring themselves the holder of world champion. 

His elegant and expensive lifestyle alongside his gambling would lead him to earn the title     Dapper Dan of the ring.     This would eventually lead to bankruptcy, causing him to return to the ring for some exhibit matches in 1896. His skills along with his lifestyle didn    t allow him to stay long retiring after his bout against Tommy Ryan in 1897. He would come out of retirement in again in 1914, at the age of 48 against Dick Burge in a three-round exhibition in London. 

During World War I he served as secretary for the Knights of Columbus. He would also strive for political office, running for New York State Assembly in 1934, which would prove unsuccessful. 

Jack would marry three times. Twice to stage actresses, Katie Hart who died in 1890, and later to Catherine Rowe in 1894. Rowe    s stage name was Pearl Irwin and was part of the group     The Irwin Sisters    . However, the two would divorce in May 1898. He would go on to marry Jennie Lawton in the 1920s. The two would reside in Forrest Hills, New York where Jack would work as a bookie

He would die on November 5, 1937, of Throat Cancer. Like Dempsey and Sullivan, he would die penniless. Unable to afford a burial site, funeral expenses and burial would be handled by his stepdaughter and would be buried in their family plot.  

In a time before rules and regulations when fights ended when one opponent was physically unable to continue, or he     threw in the towel,     Jack McAuliffe he would go on to be known as one of the best lightweights ever. He would be remembered in 1954 when he would be inducted into the Ring Boxing Hall of Fame, and in 1995 he would be inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame. 
