Erastus Dow Palmer (1817-1904) [Section 34, Lot 15] 
19TH century neoclassical Sculptor, Carved Angel at the Sepulchre within Albany Rural Cemetery, pre-eminent conch shell artist.
Erastus Dow Palmer was born on April 2, 1817, in Pompey, New York. He would be one of seven children to Gershom and Ruth Randall Palmer. They would live on his grandfather’s farm until 1826 when they would move to Utica. During this time Palmer would quit school and apprentice his father who was a carpenter. 
Since his childhood, Palmer would show signs of his artistic talent. He would be known to carve animals out of wood and learn how to play the flute. His carpentry and carving skills would be useful while he helped design the staircase for a church in Dunkirk, off the coast of Lake Erie. 
While living there would marry, Matilda Alton, and would have a son, Alonzo. However, in the following year in 1840, his wife would die during childbirth, and his son would die soon after that. Palmer would return to Utica and would marry Mary Jane Seaman in 1843. They would have one son and two daughters. He would continue to make carvings in his spare time and eventually do a cameo of his wife out of a conch shell, which had become a popular art form in the 19TH century.
Palmer would take his carving to a local art collector, Thomas Walker, who would become his first patron and commission him to do one of his wife. Walker would persuade him to look at other forms of carving, like sculpture. In 1846, Walker would finance a trip to for Palmer to visit New York City to purchase materials and supplies to aid in his artistic talent. While visiting Walker would connect Palmer to his cousin, the painter, and president of the National Academy of Design, Samuel F.B. Morse. Morse would later be known for inventing the telegraph and co-develop the Morse code. Walker would also introduce Palmer to the marble carver Robert Launitz, as well as educator and patron of the arts Edward Salisbury. Salisbury’s collection of neoclassical sculpture would immediately influence Palmer’s work.  
Palmer worked for a time in Albany and later New York City. In 1848, with his conch cameo entitled Virginia he would be considered the “pre-eminent executor of cochiglia portraits.” However, he would struggle to find the clientele base in New York and would return upstate. 
In 1849 Palmer would branch out from his cameos and do a full-length figure, and his first sculpture would be of his daughter which he would title Infant Ceres. The same year he would produce a full-length sculpture and Mariner’s Wife. This point forward a majority of his focus would be sculpture. The Albany Evening Journal would refer to Palmer as “the sculptor of the city.” 
He would establish a studio in Albany and hire a number of apprentices who would later serve successful are careers on their own; Charles Calverley, John Scott Hartley, and T.H. Matteson. For a time he would also hire Charles brother who would die as a fatality in the Civil War. 
Following in the neoclassical style some of his pieces would include Indian Girl or Dawn of Christianity (1855). This piece would receive so much attention that under the suggestion of Asher Durand and William Cullen Bryant, he would mount a one-man show. Twelve of his pieces would be on display at the Church of the Divine Unity in New York City and would be financially successful to Palmer. In addition to Indian Girl, one of the sculptures would be titled, Erastus Corning.
Palmer would go on to do numerous other pieces: White Captive (1858), Memory (1859), Little Peasant (1859), and Immortality (1859). During the Civil War, he would sculpt Peace in Bondage (1863). 
However, one of his most controversial pieces would be in Albany Rural Cemetery. In 1865 he would do Angel at the Sepulchre  (Pictured at Left) for the wife of Robert Lenox Banks, treasurer of New York Central Railroad. His sculpture caused great deal of attention as the angel was a male. Palmer’s critics would site that angels were either female or cherubs. He would repute their claim citing that archangels Gabriel and Michael, and at one point Lucifer, were all male angels. 
 In the 1870s Palmer’s focus would be more on bronze than marble sculpting. He would be commissioned to do a bronze statue of Robert Livingston, who helped negotiate the Louisiana Purchase while serving as the U.S. Minister to France. One statue stands in the U.S. Capitol Hall of Statues, and another in the New York State Court of Appeals and would be completed in 1874. 
Erastus would receive an honorary degree in 1873 Union College and would continue to do bronze work until 1892. Some of his pieces during that time would include The New York State of Arms (1886), The Fort Orange Club Arms (1886), Thomas W. Olcott (1886), and Thomas McCredie (1892). 
Erastus Palmer would pass away on March 9, 1904, in Albany. His family monument would be designed by Marcus T. Reynolds, an Albany architect. Walter Laurent Palmer, his son, would follow in his father’s footsteps as an artist as American Impressionist painter and would study Charles Loring Elliott, a family friend. 
