Phoebe Harris Phelps (1818      1889 [Section 18, Lot 3]
Survivor of Domestic Violence with assistance by Susan B. Anthony, Author of moral themed books
Phoebe Harris was born on February 10, 1818 (possibly Montgomery County). She was one of five children to Frederick Waterman Harris and Lucy Hamilton Harris. Phoebe would attend Albany Female Academy and graduate in 1835. She would stay on at the school and teach for some years after that. 
In 1841 she would marry Charles Abner Phelps, who graduated from Union College the same year. Charles would come from an old New England family who were founders of Dorchester Massachusetts and Windsor Connecticut. They would move to Boston, where he would attend Harvard Medical School, graduating in 1844, and then attend Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia. 
They would eventually move to Boston and reside in Beacon Hill. While Phoebe would raise their children, three daughters, and a son, Charles would work in his father    s practice. He would research skin diseases aboard which would eventually lead to the opening of the first skin specialty hospital in Boston. 
Charles political aspirations in 1855 would lead him to the Massachusetts legislature for two terms and then the Senate. In both houses, he would rise to the top ranking position. He would eventually leave medicine completely and serve in a variety of appointed positions under President Lincoln and Grant. 
Due to written accounts by Phoebe, he would be abusive towards her and would be unfaithful. When she confronted him about extramarital affairs, Charles was violent and threw her down a flight of stairs. He would later admit her to the McLean Asylum for the Insane nearby. She would stay committed for nearly eighteen months. 
She would eventually leave the asylum. One version would mention she escaped, while other reports mentioned she was released to her older brother Ira Harris. Ira would hold many political positions, as a judge, Assemblyman, and one term U.S. Senator during the Civil War and the years following. 
During this time, she would seek the guidance of Susan B. Anthony in 1860 upon a visit in Albany.     Please won    t you help me? No one else will. I am a wife and mother. When I finally confronted my husband with proof of his adulteries, he beat me and had me put way in an Insane Asylum. My brother had me free, but could not obtain permission for me to see my children. Yesterday, after a year, I was allowed to visit one child. I fled the state with her immediately. And now I am a fugitive.    
Susan B. Anthony would take Phoebe and her child into New York City where she would help them seek refuge. Her friends and colleagues believed that her actions in aiding Phoebe would damage the work they the suffragettes had done to the anti-slavery and women    s right    s movement. Anthony was quoted in stating     Don    t you break the law every time you help a slave to Canada? Well, the law which gives the father the sole ownership of the children is just as wicked, and I    ll break it just as quickly. You would die before you would deliver a slave to his master and I will die before I give up a child to his father.     Charles would threaten to have Anthony arrested during her public lectures and would hire detectives to find his daughter. 

They eventually would be found in Philadelphia where Phoebe would be living there supporting herself as a seamstress, and most famously a writer. She wrote some books all containing a collection of stories, whose tone conveyed moral instruction. Her books would often use the use of her children    s names, with     The Soldier    s Ring, and Other Stories,     published in 1865 dedicated to her daughter Delia.  
Phoebe would file for divorce in 1865 with the assistance of Anthony and the separation would be granted. Phoebe would be reunited with her daughters; however, there is no mention of her son, who also shared the name of her husband. Charles would never be charged for domestic violence against Phoebe.
Phoebe would die in 1899 and would be buried in the Harris family plot. 



 
