Stanford Mausoleum (1795-1862) [Section 18 Lot 105]
Built for parents of railroad magnate Leland Stanford, co-founder of Stanford University, aided in westward migration, the creation of the Albany      Schenectady Turnpike, the creation of the Hudson      Mohawk Railroad, co-owner of Central Pacific Railroad, Governor of California, U.S. Senator from California. 

The Stanford family would be connected with the various modes of transportation connecting Albany, NY with westward migration of the United States. The Appalachian Mountains prohibited migration to the west, however, the Mohawk River and the land around it would allow for this to happen. They would have nine children. One son would die at child, and their only daughter, Jane, who would die in infancy. Their sons Josiah, Charles, DeWitt, Philip, Thomas, and Leland, and would help shape Albany, and later other portions of the U.S. in the years of years of Manifest Destiny. 
In 1799, Lyman and Elizabeth Stanford would lease land in the Lisha Kill section of what was at the time Watervliet, currently Colonie. Lisha Kill is conveniently located halfway between Schenectady and Albany. The Stanford home would be located on the original road between the two cities which at that time was termed     the Kings Highway    .  With the passing of the Albany Schenectady Turnpike in 1802, this would establish a straight road between the two cities     four rods wide with two rod wide roadbed; a rod being 16.5 feet survey measure.     Lyman, whose portion of property would later become the highway, would work as a contractor, and later open the first tavern along the road next to the tollhouse on the western side.  In total there would be 26 taverns along a 16 mile stretch of road.
Presently known as Central Avenue, when it was finished it would become the most heavily travelled commercial road in the United States at that time. For the next 25 years this road would serve as a gateway to the west. However, by 1810 there would be discussion of using the Mohawk River, connecting the Hudson River to Lake Erie. 
The Erie Canal would be the largest public works project in the United States and would be proposed by Stephen Van Rensselaer, who would later serve on the board. Jokingly referred to as     Clinton    s Ditch     after Governor DeWitt Clinton, the canal would officially open in 1825. It is unknown if any of the Stanford family would work on his project. Lyman would pass away in 1828.
In 1831, the same group who lead the way on the Erie Canal would establish the first passenger train line in the U.S. and would parallel the Albany Schenectady Turnpike, and later freight. Known as the Hudson      Mohawk Railroad, Lyman    s son, Josiah, would serve as a contractor to grade the roadbed and supply firewood for the trains. 
In 1840, the family would lease an additional 322 acres from Stephen Van Rensselaer along the eastern side of the toll road known as Elm Grove, where they would open another tavern as well 
as a boarding house. With the discovery of gold in California at the end of the decade, five of the brothers would be living out in the state. The only son who would not go initially would be Leland who was studying law. 
The Stanford brothers would go back and force between Albany and California. They would decide to open stores to sell supplies to prospectors. Charles would return to Albany to source products and would establish the Schenectady Union a newspaper which supported staying in the Union. He would later serve in the Assembly and the New York Senate. 
Leland would work in Albany as a lawyer and later marry Jane Lathrop, daughter of Dyer Lathrop the treasurer of the Albany Orphan Asylum. They would move to Port Huron, Wisconsin where he would set up a law practice. However, a fire would destroy the building where his law practice was located, and would subsequently join his brothers out west. His wife would initially stay in Albany as Leland labeled San Francisco as     not yet a place for women,     but would later join him in 1855 after the death of her father. 
While in California Leland would have political aspirations, running unsuccessfully for state treasurer, and later for governor on the newly established Republican Party in 1859. In 1861 he ran again on the platform to keep California a part of the Union, as they waited a long time to become recognized as a state. Leland would be elected the first Republican governor in the state of California for two terms. 
During this time, Leland would be part of     The Big Four     which established the Central Pacific Railroad. Their first locomotive would be called the Gov. Stanford. The Central Pacific would later be connect with the Union Pacific, in part of President Lincoln    s Pacific Railroad Act of 1862. On May 10, 1869, when the two railways would connect in Promontory, Utah, Leland would drive in the golden spike. 
Leland would later serve as stakeholder in the Southern Pacific and California & Oregon Railroad. Additionally from 1885      1893 he would later serve in the U.S. Senate He would also found the Pacific Mutual Life Insurance (Pacific Life), and be a part of the Oriental and Occidental Steamship Company. 
Josiah would find financial success in the vineyard business and Leland would follow suit, building a 55,000 acre winery. Thomas and DeWitt Stanford would move to New Zealand and establish hardware stores, which the family had done successfully in California. 
Leland and Jane would have one son, Leland Jr. in May of 1868. Leland would become sick with typhoid fever in 1884 while on a trip to Italy. The family would be grief stricken and would donate land and securities to found the Leland Stanford, Jr. University (Stanford University) in Palo Alto. Frederic Law Olmsted would be hired to landscape the campus, on what was the winery. 
Buried in the Stanford Mausoleum are Lyman and Elizabeth Stanford, four of their children, Josiah, DeWitt, Charles, and Jane. Josiah    s wife Elizabeth would be buried there as well as four other descendants. 
