Kate Stoneman (1841-1925) [Section 56, Lot 28]
The first female to attend and graduate from Albany Law, the first woman admitted to New York State bar, suffragist.


Catherine “Kate” E. Stoneham was born on April 1, 1841, to George Stoneman, Sr., and Catherine Rebecca Cheney. Being known as Kate, she would be the seventh of eight children and reside in Lakewood, NY. Her eldest brother, Major General George Stoneman, would go on to serve in the Civil War, and would later become Governor of California. Another one of her brothers, Edward, would serve as a Judge on the Supreme Court of Illinois. 

In 1864, she would move to Albany to attend the New York State Normal College (today known as the University at Albany). At the time it was the only training school for teachers within the public school system. In addition to her studies, she would work as a copyist for the state reporter for the New York Court of Appeals.  Upon graduation, she would instruct at the Normal School where she would teach school law, geography, drawing, and penmanship. She would also instruct at the Glen’s Falls Seminary for one term, but the remaining 40 years of academia would be at her alma mater. 
In the 1870s should we become involved in the suffragist movement, and help establish the Women’s Suffrage Society of Albany. The organization would lobby elected officials for the “extension of school suffrage to women.”
The death of her great aunt would designate the executrix of her estate. From here she would become interested in law. In 1882 she would work as a clerk for Albany lawyer Worthington W. Frothingham, and would study law for three years. In 1885, she would be the first worm to pass the New York State Bar Examination. However, in 1886 her application to join would be problematic due to her gender as it excluded women. Stoneman would launch a campaign to amend the civil code procedure to “permit the admission of qualified applicants” regardless to races or gender. 
Assemblyman John Platt of Poughkeepsie would introduce a bill to remove this factor but would get held up in the judiciary committee. Stoneman, with the assistance of local suffragettes, would lobby to “dislodge the bill from committee.” Her lobbying would prove successful and would pass both the Assembly and Senate. On May 20, 1886, nine days after her initial rejection, Governor David B. Hill would sign the bill into law. She would reapply and become the first female lawyer in New York State. 
Stoneman would continue her academic education as well as in the suffragist movement. She would enroll in Albany Law School, and become the first female to graduate in 1898, at age 57. She would additionally become the first women to receive a Bachelor’s degree from Union College. She would continue her role as a suffragist and on Election Day 1918, would work as a poll watcher for the City of Albany, the first year women would be allowed to vote. 
Kate would pass away on May 19, 1925, at the age of 84 at her home in Albany. Though her grave at Albany Rural Cemetery is modest, her accomplishments would help pave the way for women’s rights and leave a legacy behind her. 
In New York State she would first be honored on May 22, 1986, the 100th Anniversary of her acceptance to the bar, Governor Mario Cuomo declared the date "Katherine Stoneman Day," honoring the 100th anniversary of her acceptance to the bar. In 2009 she would be inducted into the Seneca Fall’s National Women’s Hall of Fame in 2009.  
At Albany Law School, in addition to being posthumously honored, in 1994 they would establish the Kate Stoneman Day. On this day the Kate Stoneman Award is given to “individuals in the legal profession who have demonstrated a commitment to seeking change and expanding opportunities for women.” In the past Annette Gordon-Reed, Nell Minow and Judge Judith Kaye have all received this award. In 2017, Hon. Sonia Sotomayor, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States received the award. 

In 2000, Albany Law School would establish the Kate Stoneman visiting professorship which would become a permanent position in 2007, known as the Kate Stoneman Chair. 

In 2008 a gravesite memorial would be installed within Albany Rural Cemetery. The inscription reads:
“The present day presents greater opportunity than ever before for women… my message is to the younger women. They must take their opportunities as they come. Always there are opportunities to be had.” – Kate Stoneman
