Gilbert Milligan Tucker Jr. (1880-1968) [Section 19 Lot 9] 
Titanic Survivor, Georgist writer,  Supervisor of Exhibits with the New York State Health Department’s Division of Public Health Education

Gilbert Milligan Tucker, Jr. was born on November 3, 1880. He is the Son of Gilbert Milligan, a successful editor of agricultural magazines, and Sarah Edwards Miller. He was also the grandson of Luther Tucker, founder, and editor of Albany County Gentlemen. He would attend Albany Academy and later Cornell University, graduating in 1901. He would enter into the family business as an assistant editor. 
In 1912 at the age of 32, he would be in Europe with his sister and parents gathering materials on farming practicing when he would meet three women, Lily Potter, her niece, Olive Earnshaw, and her friend, Margaret Bechstein Hays. Margaret, 24 years of age, was from New York City and would be traveling her he Pomeranian. Gilbert would begin to court Margaret and would convince his family to that he would escort them through Europe. While en route back to the U.S. a coal strike in Britain would deter their travel plans and would learn about the RMS Titanic and secured first class tickets. Gilbert would occupy C-53.
On April 14, 1912, the Titanic would strike an iceberg off the coast of New Foundland. Upon hearing this Lily would take the two young girls, the dog, and Gilbert and would be some of the first to evacuate on the twenty lifeboats, a majority of them would have the capacity to care 65 people. There were initially supposed to be 32 lifeboats but removed from the ship’s deck for aesthetic purposes. 
However, Gilbert would initially be excluded due to the women and children protocol but would join the women while being lowered into the Atlantic. He is quoted in the Albany Times-Union in 1912 by saying “When the boat was about 15 feet below the rail, my friends called to me to come along, and with one or two other men I slid down the ropes.” In total 15 people would be on lifeboat seven which would be rescued by the Carpathia hours later. 
Gilbert and Margaret would end her courtship though they would stay in contact with each other. However, while onboard the Carpathia she would meet two young boys who only spoke French. As she was fluent, she would take them under her care and would be known as the “Titanic Orphans,” which were on a later lifeboat. She would take care of them until her mother would come to New York City and be reunited with them. 
Gilbert would marry Mildred Penrose Stewart in 1921 and the couple would reside in Glenmont in the Rock Hill estate and later in Pines Hills neighborhood of Albany. He would also have an office in the D&H Building where he would serve as editor to the family’s magazine. He would also work with the Albany Institute of History and Art.

From 1918 – 1933 Gilbert would serve as the Supervisor of Exhibits with the New York State Health Department’s Division of Public Health Education. He would write articles, and create exhibits and films about epidemiology and health maintenance. He would also be responsible for establishing the Healthmobile, an automobile that would travel around the state, even to areas which had no electricity, showing motion pictures on health.
Additionally, he would write four books on tax-reform following the writings of economists Henry George. At the end of World War II, he would write The Self-Supporting City, which offers a program for any city to move from self-destruction to economic sanity and prosperity through public investment cities make on infrastructure and services. 
He would be known as Albany’s most notably Georgist and would serve as the President for the Economic Education League, and the President of the Association for Economic Justice. He would serve on the board of director of the Henry George and Schalkenbach Foundation. However, later in life he would become disillusioned and would become a critic of the Tennessee Valley Authority. 
He would move to California in 1965 and would reside in Monterey County. He would pass away three years later on February 26, 1968, Gilbert and was cremated. His remains would be sent to Albany where he would be interred in his grandfather’s plot. 
